you're watching maverick media educate
organized act
you
[Music]
thank you for joining calls TV I'm Cindy
pastor we're here today in Venice we met
up with journalist Robert Perry is our
guest on the show today
Robert is a longtime independent
journalist he broke some of the major
stories from the iran-contra scandal
which is a big part of American history
which is still playing out Robert Perry
is also an author and author of three
books his latest one I just coming out
is neck deep the disastrous presidency
of George W Bush we are so honored to
have Robert he's also the winner of the
George Polk award a very prestigious
word which sits in a category with some
of our very best journalists in this
country so ladies and gentlemen Robert
Perry thank you I use you've been office
for so long I mean with iran-contra for
all these decades really you've been
bringing the truth to the American
people are trying to bring the truth of
America people how did we get in the
position we are now how did we get from
there to here where there's so much
stuff you Mary people are not aware of
that the media's and getting out to us
that maybe our government is allowed to
appear there so frequently that people
don't feel that they even trust the
government at all anymore
so how did we get here well a good
starting point is to go back to the
Vietnam era when the American people
were very engaged millions and millions
of people were trying to stop the
Vietnam War there were a number of
underground publications that were
making the case explaining to people why
the war was wrong you had the mainstream
media responding to that starting to
reflect some of that anger and concern
you had in that era of Tyler's stories
that were coming out they were really
exposing some of the illegal and
improper things that the US government
had done you had Dan Ellsberg for
instance leaking the Pentagon Papers to
the New York Times and other newspapers
that led President Richard Nixon to
respond with
an aggressive attempt to try to
discredit Ellsberg and that insert the
plumbers unit which led ultimately to
turning that on his political enemies
like the Democrats in the in the 72
election you have the Washington Post
stepping forward with the Bott wood with
Woodward and Bernstein digging into that
exposing how Nixon had abused his powers
the Watergate scandal ended up driving
Nixon from office in the wake of that
you had up someone like sy Hersh who had
been working at dispatch news kind of an
underground wire service where he'd
written about the me lie massacre he's
been hired by the New York Times so you
had this sort of building of people in
the in both of the progressive community
but also the mainstream press digging
out information that was important to
the American people
Hearst in a number of stories about
abuses committed by the Central
Intelligence Agency exposing that to the
American people now these developments
were quite shocking to many members of
the American establishment you had a
population that was increasingly out of
control you had a press corps that was
digging into the darkest secrets of the
government exposing what some of the
businesses were doing in collusion with
the government so that had to be
reversed and what we start seeing is we
get to the mid and late 1970s was an
effort to start turning that around the
19th the 1970s also was a time when the
Cold War was perceived as ending the
Soviet Union was seen as by the Central
Intelligence Agency and many analysts as
as having lost the Cold War that there
was that the no longer the threatening
force that people had thought it might
have been back in the 50s and 60s you
had even Nixon and Kissinger and
President Ford talking about they taught
there the idea that they could work with
the Soviet Union to negotiate some of
the most dangerous aspects of the Cold
War so you had a very interesting moment
but that also had to be reversed by as
far as the people who were invested in
the Cold War were concerned the
military-industrial complex some of the
old cold warriors some of these think
tanks that it had that had tried to that
it made a lot of money in Bend races
lustful in in in exaggerating the
dangers of the Soviet Union so they they
try to come back and you see even as
early as 1976 where some of these old
cold warriors and a new group that we
now know as the neoconservatives began
to come together there was an effort
inside the CIA to have a challenge to
the CIA analysts who were seeing this
Soviet decline it was called team B and
and under then CIA director george HW
bush these this team of cold warriors
and people like paul wolfowitz one of
the early neo cons were allowed into the
to see the raw material and their
conclusions were the opposite of what
the CIA analysts were coming up with
instead of saying soviet union was in
decline these analysts said these
Outsiders said the soviet union was ten
feet tall was about to take over the
world and we better build up our
military again to support them so that
became sort of pressure that we'd see in
the late 1970s going into the period
when ronald reagan who had been running
who challenged forward in 76 ultimately
gets the Republican nomination in 1980
and begins and begins to push for
reestablishing this kind of fearful
America building its building up the
military against investing huge amounts
of money in in weaponry to somehow
challenge the Soviet Union to end to
fight them in all these little places
around the world like Central America or
Angola or Mozambique or all these
third-world countries that were now
being put in play by by the by the
Reagan people with the idea that that
was needed to to stop the Soviet Union
and defeat them in this global battle
which many people thought had been
pretty much ended so we had this sort of
push back it was also an effort by some
of the Republicans of people like former
Treasury Secretary William Simon to pull
together resources from the foundations
Smith Richardson Olin skate to begin to
invest in media apparatus and they began
to build magazines and they set up
attack groups to go after mainstream
journalists who might
reporting things that would be
considered unfavorable to these
propagandists so you had that evolving
in that period too and it simultaneously
the American Left tended to withdraw
many of the underground publications of
the 70s were shut down or sold off even
some long-standing operations like the
New Republic was sold to Marty Paris and
neoconservative so instead of New
Republic being a home for strong liberal
opinion it became the place for Charlie
Krauthammer
and fred barnes to sort of develop their
skills so we started seeing this
evolution of going back to kind of this
fearful cold warrior status and
essentially the sort of how do you get
rid of the Vietnam syndrome became a big
factor for the for many of the
conservatives in that time frame and
what and under Reagan once he became
president this sort of meshed with
efforts inside the government to do to
sort of get the American people scared
again there was a concept that was being
pushed by some of the people inside the
reagan camp called perception management
the idea was if you could manage the
perceptions of american people and make
them scared enough about these various
threats abroad whether whether in
central america or someplace else
that they would then support building up
the military and doing what reagan said
was necessary so ultimately when do you
start going through this time period and
you and it becomes harder and harder to
do the kinds of stories that the press
was doing back in the 1970s I was with
The Associated Press during this period
and I was on a special assignment team
and trying to dig into some of these
stories became something that was more
and more of a career risk and a lot of
journalists who tried to do these
stories ended up having very bad
outcomes one of the famous cases dealt
with Raymond Bonnar
who was a New York Times correspondent
in Central America and he was describing
these death squad activities that were
underway by right-wing government
supported by the Reagan administration
and that wasn't acceptable to the Reagan
people so they began to attack him they
had their outside groups try to question
his his his ethics and his the quality
of his journalism and when he did a
major piece about a massacre that had
occurred in 1981 caught place called el
mozote a and he exposed this in early 82
just as Reagan was putting out a report
saying the Salvadoran military was now
acting in respect of human rights that
was very embarrassing for the Reagan
people so they went after ray Bonner
even more and ultimately the New York
Times which had been hasn't had an
executive editor Abe Rosenthal who was
also sympathetic to the neoconservative
cause basically Bonner was pulled out
given a humiliating assignment and
ultimately forced out of the New York
Times and that kind of message was being
sent to all of us that if you if you
really cared about your career you don't
go to certain places you don't write
certain stories some of us kept trying
to do it but it became increasingly hard
in terms of honor that you brought out
the journalists honor he was vindicated
could you just briefly tell us how he
was vindicated well the story of the of
the el mozote a massacre was that
roughly 800 Salvadorans were taken by
the by the Salvadoran military which was
conducting an offensive just before
Christmas 1981 and they were brought
into this town of Elmas okay there were
the father's the men and the women and
the children and first they first the
Salvadoran military executed the men in
front of their families then they killed
the women some were raped then they
murdered the children some many were
burned alive in a in a church where they
were locked others were bludgeoned to
death it was a horrible horrible
massacre and it was part of an effort by
the Salvadoran military at that time to
show here's what happens to you if
you're seen as being sympathetic to the
guerrillas when Bonner disclosed this if
he went to the and went actually to the
scene and got enough testimony from
survivors it was when one woman who had
survived witnessed much of this and got
other information then he was attacked
by the Reagan administration for
basically making it up and so the el
mozote a story was left in that sort of
hazy
the area while there was a lot of
evidence to support it
there was also these attacks on it by by
the US government Bonner was sort of
pulled out of El Salvador and disgraced
driven out of the New York Times he
became a freelancer for quite a few
years so there were reasons to think
that well maybe didn't happen
maybe the remonstration was telling the
truth Bonner was off on some wild
tangent but at the end of the route
Salvadoran Civil War in 1990 a UN
forensic team was brought in to
investigate some of these the worst
massacres at war and they went to el
mozote a and they dug up the skeletons
including the skeletons of many children
so Bonner was vindicated
he was also quickly rehired by the New
York Times at about that point because
they didn't want to be seen as then want
that full story to come out that they
had basically persecuted some reporter
had done his job right so that's how the
game was being played but Bonner was
vindicated by that UN report at the end
of the Salvadoran war and you yourself
had the experience of being shut down
for some of the stories that you could
have right basically when you in the
1980s there was this effort by the
Reagan administration to overthrow the
government of Nicaragua have been taken
over by a leftist group called the
Sandinistas and the Reagan
administration began to support group
that was known as the Contras and they
were based mostly in Honduras somewhat
in Costa Rica and they were being backed
first by the Argentine Secret Service's
later by the CIA and they were being
sent into Nicaragua to wreak havoc
basically to destabilize the country
with the goal that they would maybe win
eventually and drive the Sandinistas out
so the Congress which was still
controlled by the Democrats at least in
the house side at that point try to
prevent this effort there was a concern
that there might be a new Vietnam we've
got the United as we've drawn in to this
conflict in a way that would cause more
Americans to die the Vietnam syndrome
was still alive and well if you will so
Congress tried to stop this effort they
thought was also wrong to overthrow of
other country another government and
Reagan then had to find ways around it
so he began to figure out secret ways to
fund the Contras and one thing that we
were doing at The Associated Press was
trying to track where the money was
coming from because there was no water
coming from the Congress how was the
Reagan administration carrying out this
secret war so we began searching it for
the money and I was working with Brian
Barger at the time and we stumbled upon
the fact that some of the Contras were
increasing their money by by being
involved in the drug trade and because
they had this special relationship with
the US government the the drug
traffickers knew that if they could use
the Contras as sort of a cover they
could then move their drugs more safely
into the United States and that in fact
is what happened when they get caught or
when they'd be a problem the CIA might
step in and say what will this one go
for the good of the country we don't
want to have the embarrassing publicity
so it became a useful way for some of
the drug traffickers to to get their
drugs into the US markets so we stumbled
upon that story and had trouble getting
out but ultimately did we also were
following how Ollie north was was
conducting his business with other with
other fund raising operations to keep
the Contras in play but ultimately what
what led to the exposure of iran-contra
was kind of an accident in part because
the New York Times in the Washington
Post had now moved farther and farther
away from being willing to do these
kinds of stories the regular miseration
flatly denied our stories there was a
sense that you don't want to go there
they were letting a lot of sympathy
frankly I'm look at senior levels of
those news organizations for Reagan's
idea of reasserting American power so it
wasn't that you had the liberal press
which is often what the write has tried
to tell us you actually had a press
corps that was very sympathetic to an
aggressive American foreign policy and
when stories came out that went against
that or made that look bad it was not
well received at the higher levels of
the news outlets so eventually what
would brought the iran-contra scandal
out was that after the Congress had been
sort of beaten into restoring aides to
the
the Democrats finally caved on that it
was in 1986 but one of North's last
flights dropping guns to the Contras was
shot down by some kid sanity's too
drafty he was still a teenager and he
they've given him a SAN missile and he
fired it at this plane that he saw
flying over and it hit the plane to his
amazement and and the plane began
crashing one of the people on board
Eugene hasenfus had a parachute and was
able to bail out of the plane and came
down it was captured and began talking
and the and the crew had taken a number
of their documents with them so the
Sandinistas recovered from the plane a
number of the records of Barger and I
went down and were given by the
Sandinistas these records so we began
then tracing back again finding at this
there was this intricate arrangement for
secretly running a war that had been
kept from the American people and hidden
from Congress so that became so even
though even then the White House
continues to deny deny deny a month or
so later there was a slow j''r in in
Beirut newspaper about another secret
operation which was the Reagan
administration secretly selling weapons
to the Iranians and using the profits we
were late to find out that they were
using some of the profits to help the
Contras so it became here and Contra
affair but what we really was seeing was
a reassertion by the Reagan
administration and the neoconservatives
around him of the imperial presidency
that had been essentially beaten back
after Nixon's failure there was an
effort to rebuild it and restore it and
operate outside the law again so that
became the the iran-contra scandal there
was a chance that we could expose that
in a more full way and show the problem
but by then the right-wing media had
built up to such a level and the
mainstream press had gotten rather
cowardly and the progressive media
pretty much shut down so so the Reagan
people were able to block many of the
most serious aspects of that
investigation and they were able to
essentially make it very boring to the
American people confusing
and those of us trying to follow it
essentially lost the battle of getting
at the truth even though we would keep
moving step by step forward the assaults
on us became pretty hard to absorb we
were accused of trying to undermine the
president being damaging to the country
and the American press corps just didn't
want to do that anymore it became like a
very hard thing to maintain your career
when you were facing those kinds of
assaults I moved on to Newsweek during
this period and encountered inside
Newsweek even worse situation than I saw
at ap some of the top executives and
Newsweek were very much in support of
Reagan's policies they liked the idea of
an aggressive foreign policy and the
idea of telling stories that expose the
the dark side of that we're just not
very acceptable so I battle through that
for a number of years and ultimately
left Newsweek in 1990 feeling that that
essentially at that point the amount the
mainstream American press corps had lost
its way that we had gone a very far
distance from when it happened in the
1970s and about that part of in early
90s we also saw the the now the Bush
administration for his Bush
administration see an opening to destroy
the Vietnam syndrome once and for all as
the phrase went there was a case with
Saddam Hussein and Iraq invaded Kuwait
President George HW Bush moved to
counter that to drive the Iraqis out of
Kuwait there was a lot of bombing of the
Iraqi forces and if when you get to this
period in early 1991 these the generals
on the on the ground the American
generals general Schwarzkopf and others
felt that there was no need to have a
ground war that there was an offer from
Soviet President Gorbachev to negotiate
basically a withdrawal the Iraqi forces
to save lives
the Iraqis would leave behind their
weapons and move out and Schwarzkopf
tried to convince the then chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff Colin Powell
to help him on make this case to the
president and and so so Schwarzkopf
thinks he has Powell on his side and
Powell goes over to the Oval Office
and walked in on a meeting where
President Bush is upset about this peace
deal from Gorbachev he wants to have a
ground war he feels that that's very
important to the American psyche to
actually have a conflict where the
United States troops wipe out the enemy
well you just want to also entirely
alienate Gorbachev so President Bush is
looking for a solution and : pol raises
his hand and says well you know mr.
president we could give them one day to
a draw and they couldn't do that so then
we could go ahead with the invasion with
our counter invasion or attack and
bushes that's a great idea : and he goes
out announces at the White House that
the Rockies have one day to draw their
forces and back in Saudi Arabia the the
generals warts qualify others look at
each other and say well we're going to
go to war and in fact they do and they
move in and they essentially annihilate
the overwhelmed Iraqi forces tens of
thousands are killed both of these are
draftees some from Iraq and Bush then
calls the end of the conflict after a
hundred hours after we've shown that we
could we could do this 180 or so
Americans die and Bush then goes out to
announce this victory and what some of
the first words out of his mouth are we
kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for
all and the significance of that is that
this has been what they were after all
along they wanted to get back control of
the American people the American people
back behind this idea of America is a
powerful Imperial force in the world
willing to take on these other countries
and and do so very effectively and after
the Persian Gulf War was won and the
troops came home there were these
celebrations at the end of Washington
Mall there were tanks so your kids could
go play on the tanks they had major
fireworks displays they had a ticker
tape parades for Colton Powell and
general Schwarzkopf they tried to make
war fun again and it basically they
succeeded
Americans sort of now became more
enthusiastic about war they they began
to identify with the brave young men and
women in uniform so it made future
efforts much more sellable the Vietnam
experience had been forgotten put in the
past and all these things that had
happened over those two decades or so
had been designed to achieve just that
result so when you get to the point of
Bill Clinton coming into office and the
Democrats essentially at least briefly
sort of taking back control of the
government that was the reality they
faced and Clinton did not want to
anymore
expose the criminality of some of the
reagan-bush activities then then the
Republicans did Clinton felt that took
safe to go dig into our to iran-contra
further to dig into the Contra drug
trafficking problem to dig into the Iraq
Gate issue in Iraq gate was another
scandal where during the 80s Reagan
secretly was arming Saddam Hussein's
Iraq which which came to look pretty
stupid
Wednes we once the u.s. had to go to war
with the Iraqis so that had to be
covered up and Clinton went along with
most of that because he felt it was good
for the bipartisanship he thought he
could work with these people he had
other things on his agenda like health
care and he thought he could get the
Republicans to be supportive the
Republicans by this point had built up
such a powerful media apparatus of their
own with think tanks and all kinds of
ways of getting a message out with this
point we'd move far beyond just
magazines and newspapers now we had talk
radio at play Rush Limbaugh was out
there and so were a number of other
right-wing talk radio people pounding
away at Clinton and the Democrats we're
setting up the stage for 94 and the
Republican revolution when they took
over the Congress so you had she had
this major shift in how America had was
was functioning unless they also that
the progressive community in general
they're obviously deceptions but they
had not really responded there wasn't
much pushback essentially the
progressive position was that the
mainstream press should do this job that
the politicians should you know get some
spine and
and up for these things but you know the
way people really are if they're looking
at the possibility of losing their job
and their paycheck or losing an election
and being humiliated they tend to try to
do what what they can to avoid that most
people do there are heroes and there are
people that are brave and stand up but
most of them were being that were being
wiped out so they became an example of a
different sort if you stood up to them
see what happens the Raybon are kind of
examples later on there was a Gary Webb
example when Gary Webb for the San Jose
Mercury News revived our old stories
about contra drug trafficking in the mid
90s he was he was banished attacked
viciously and had his career cut short
ultimately he committed suicide but
those kinds of painful experiences were
the message that people were getting so
if you wanted to do the right thing
there was a very high price for it
notice and you can make a lot of money
and be very respected and be on TV if
you play ball so the rewards were one
way the punishments were the other it
would reverse and what we might want to
see he did the right thing you're
punished would be the wrong thing to
play play ball with the wrongs with the
wrong points of view and did what they
wanted the rewards were enormous so
we've come an awfully long ways in the
sense that because that whole direction
to cover up the truth to keep the
American people slide to make more
sellable people like yourself like
yourself and have had your stories
really repress and so I have to thank
you we all have to thank you for keeping
at it all of these decades I really do
appreciate that
[Music]